---
layout: post
title: How we should protect our friends' information
head-image: data-key.jpg
tags: [communications, data, email, life, privacy, safety, security]
---

We all know by now that our information is somewhere- be it online or
off. There's various contact management sites, such as Google Contacts,
Plaxo, and others, and they presumably have appropriate precautions set
up in order to protect information that users choose to share about
themselves (and their contacts).

However, what about information about us such as email addresses or
phone numbers that friends store on their computers? In a disturbing
amount of times, this information is stored in an email client's
'address book' on a relatively insecure computer. One of our friends,
somewhere, has sensitive data stored about us on their computer- a fact
that is inevitable due to the many services provided by software, things
such as chat records, contact information, and a number of other things.
There's no real way to know how personal information is being dealt with
the second it's published to the Internet or even simply shared with
friends.

Case in point- Chi.mp recently discontinued its "Ultimate Black Book", a
contact management system on their site that allowed users to import and
merge contacts from various websites. I downloaded my entire contact
list as a VCard and stored it on my desktop while I attempted to figure
out what to do with it- all 130 contacts complete with names, email
addresses, web addresses, and phone numbers. Some people wouldn't give a
second thought to leaving this information on their computer- which is
unfortunate for those of us with less-than-tech-savvy friends who's
passwords may be along the lines of "password". As someone who considers
his computer to be decently secure, I felt extremely uncomfortable about
leaving this mass of personal information relatively unprotected on my
system- and I'm behind two firewalls on a secured Linux system with a
powerful password and that's disconnected from the Internet for a good
part of the day (it's a laptop).

Rather than shutting my system off and going to bed, I fired up the
encryption software bundled with my system and encrypted the file- then
shredded the unencrypted copy. I felt that this was sufficient security
not only for me, but for my friends' information, while I stored my
contact list and searched for a new online service for a few days- and I
eventually settled on Google Contacts.

Maybe I'm just paranoid, but the thought of my personal information
floating around on a friend's computer unprotected bothers me somewhat.
I feel good about my method of storing contact information for the
various people I'm in touch with, especially since had the inevitable
happened- someone hacked my computer, or worse, someone stole my
computer, they probably would have had a fair amount of trouble stealing
data about my friends.
