---
layout: post
title: What Site to Trust Next
head-image: data-key.jpg
tags: [google, internet, news, passwords, privacy, safety, security]
---

As Dropbox is my favorite (and currently, only) cloud storage provider,
I place a lot of trust in them in, both in terms of reliability (they
are my backup system) and security (I store my journal with them).  I
trust Dropbox with a huge part of my digital life, so I stay up to date
on their company goings-on in order to make sure my trust is not
misplaced, and thus far, it has not been.

However, on Sunday Dropbox had a particularly bad security issue; a
software update left all accounts accessible without a password for a
little over 4 hours, at which point the issue was fixed; though 1% of
Dropbox's millions of users were affected.  The issue was kept
relatively quiet; the Dropbox crew emailed all affected users, and
posted a low-key announcement on their blog that was picked up by a
number of other blogs.  It comes at a bad time for Dropbox, given Sony's
recent issues and the wave of hacking going on that even allegedly
resulted in the UK's 2011 Census data being stolen.  Not to mention of
course, the recent, unannounced features of Facebook and Google (facial
recognition and contact list searching) that have raised accusations of
breaches of privacy.

It is worth noting that I was *not* one of the affected Dropbox users,
but simply someone who is extremely careful when it comes to online
security.  With that said, I am now searching for a new means of storing
files online that suits my high expectation of security - and once I
find one, I'll be sure to write about it.  Not that I've lost my love of
Dropbox, just my trust in them when it comes to storing more sensitive
files without encrypting them prior to sending them to Dropbox's
storage.

On a relatively related note, passwords were published from several
hacked sites including GMail, PayPal, World of Warcraft, and Facebook. 
Although these are directly related to the recent wave of hacking, it
begs the question of whether or not too much trust is placed in those
sites.  To find out if your account was among the hacked, visit
<https://shouldichangemypassword.com/>.  If it was hacked, or if you're
rightfully paranoid, consider turning on the 2-step verification that
Google and Facebook both offer so that if your password is compromised,
your account still can't be logged into unless the perpetrator has your
phone as well to receive the second verification code needed to log in. 
Changing your passwords regularly should also go without question.
