---
layout: post
title: What Site Leaked Your Data?
head-image: data-key.jpg
tags: internet, privacy, security]
---

The Internet is notoriously bad when it comes to privacy, which is a
fact that has unfortunately been accepted - and even embraced - by most
avid surfers. Facebook has leaked various pieces of user information to
various places (including Google search), Google has taken to reading
emails and contact lists, and people search sites have disturbingly
recent and accurate information open to the public. Recent news from
around the Internet seems to show that as much as sites explain how
secure they are, they still have their shortcomings and secrets.

Google made no secret of the fact that it was changing how it serves ads
to its GMail users; it announced it publicly on the Google Blog and
notified all GMail users. To sum it up, Google stated that they were
going to take notice of email content in order to show relevant
advertisements; essentially, their ad crawler was going to read emails.
Rumour has it that they will also be taking this a step further in the
near future by looking at attachments, and displaying non-animated
graphical ads as well when images are included in an email. Considering
that GMail is funded entirely by advertising (as is Google as a whole),
the move is understandable, but not any less creepy when it's all said
and done. However, Google introduced something behind the scenes as well
that has gone mostly unnoticed and completely unannounced.

Google now crawls (optionally, I might add) contact lists, then searches
competing sites for users with the same contacts, aka you, and offers to
"connect" the account with Google as part of the public profile. I find
that this explains my experience with Google finding me on *every* site
I happen to be on. On Google's end, this is part of a business technique
to compete with Facebook, but as far as I'm concerned, at least, it's
really very creepy, especially with the amount of information I have for
most of my contacts. I consider my contact list somewhat private and I
take the security of my friends' data pretty seriously so as such I
don't approve of Google crawling my contact list. I was able to shut off
the option on this page:
<https://profiles.google.com/u/0/connectedaccounts> (bottom checkbox), a
somewhat hidden preference panel.

Of a much more serious concern, Facebook recently fixed a huge security
issue with the way applications interact with user data. I won't post
the technical details, but essentially, Facebook applications
accidentally leaked user information to advertisers and other third
parties. According to the Symantec blog, “\[third parties and
advertisers\] have accidentally had access to Facebook users’ accounts
including profiles, photographs, chat, and also had the ability to post
messages and mine personal information.” Symantec also states that most
probably didn't realize the flaw, but when it comes to hackers, I'm sure
the flaw was known and exploited at some point. Facebook has supposedly
fixed the problem, but if you are of the more careful type, changing
your password resets Application access and fixes the problem.

*More Information:*

*[How Google Spies on Your Gmail Account,
Gawker](http://gawker.com/5800868/how-google-spies-on-your-gmail-account-and-how-to-stop-it)*

*[Facebook Applications Accidentally Leaking Access to Third Parties,
Symantec
Blog](http://www.symantec.com/connect/blogs/facebook-applications-accidentally-leaking-access-third-parties)*
