---
layout: post
title: Google and Facebook's New Looks
head-image: social-tree.jpg
tags: [facebook, google, social networking]
---

Google and Facebook are both in the process of rolling out some changes
to their interfaces; Google started soon after announcing Google+, and
Facebook started just in time for everyone to log into Facebook at work
Monday morning and be irritated about it.

For Google, the new look is pretty slick and integrates Google+ features
(for those using the service) across most of Google's products with a
new upper bar.  The rest of the services that the change has affected
now sport a new layout that is much more consistent across Google that
was a long time coming, particularly for Blogger, but doesn't change
anything so significantly that anything is hard to find.  The new upper
bar provides slick integration with Google+ for those using it and is
more noticeable for switching between services.  So far changes have
been rolled out to GMail via a preview theme, Calendar, Blogger in
Draft, Search, the Help centre, YouTube, and the account page
(accessible through Google+) that include a new colour scheme and in
some cases, smaller logos.  I haven't really heard any complaints about
it and I don't have any myself.

Facebook, however, introduced a new chat interface this weekend.  The
new interface moves the contact list into a sidebar, moving the options
to minimize the list and change availability settings into a menu. 
Worse, it no longer shows only online friends- just a long list of those
recently contacted, online or not, with a search at the bottom.  The
annoyance resulting from this change has been amazing, at least within
my group of friends, and understandably given that it makes the chat
more annoying to use.  As someone who usually takes Facebook's
occasional changes in stride without any issues, I found the new chat
interface extremely annoying, mainly because in the attempt at
simplifying it, the interface made all the features harder to use.  The
big question becomes whether or not Facebook will listen to user
feedback in light of their competition with Google+.  If not...several
of my friends have mentioned moving to Google+, so it will be
interesting to see where it goes over the course of the week.
