---
layout: post
title: Ad Blocking Ethics
head-image: paper-pad.jpg
tags: [communications, ethics, internet]
---

As with essentially everything else in the modern world, the Internet
fosters advertising; and has huge industries surrounding it.  Given the
young and evolving nature of the Internet the ad industry has undergone
many changes and compared with its extremely sketchy past, improved
significantly.  Ads are now targeted and tracked - and censored, in some
cases - so they are relevant and whatever happens to lie on the other
end of the click is of use.

Online advertisements have garnered a bad reputation, in large due to
their past and in the case of some websites, their intrusiveness.  Popup
blockers are old news and are built in to any modern browser, though
less due to the annoyance of popups than to the security risk they
pose.  Following the popup blockers though, have been browser extensions
such as Adblock, which are built to block *all* online ads of any type. 
It appears that quite an industry is springing up around the blocking of
advertisements, considering that the Adblock developer left his job and
relies solely on profits from Adblock donations.

The practice of blocking advertisements, though nothing new, is becoming
so widespread that it is a problem for a huge industry, not to mention
the smaller websites that rely on revenue from ads to pay for their web
space.  Due to the reliance on ads - which for a large part are
forgiveable and unintrusive - to support websites, ad blocking raises an
interesting question of ethics; when is it permissible to block ads
rather than simply ignoring those that aren't interesting?  Given the
huge effort that goes into tracking and targeting ads, ads have become
more relevant and more reputable in most cases, and no longer hijack
browser windows for attention (in most cases).

Blocking ads appears to be becoming a standard practice, despite the
fact that they are no longer a particular security threat and less
effort is put into teaching new Internet users not to click them.  Sites
that rely on advertising revenue in many cases simply need the ads to be
shown on the page, so blocking them means that there is no chance for
the site to be paid.  Removing ads from pages seems like a minor and
beneficial choice, but in reality it hurts frequented sites.  Simply
shutting off Adblock (or choosing not to block ads) is one of the best
ways to support free sites without directly donating money to them. 
Most free sites are supported by advertising revenue, which is worth
keeping in mind while perusing the Internet.
