---
layout: post
title: Google's Latest Privacy Woes
head-image: data-key.jpg
tags: [google, internet, privacy, safety, world]
---

Google has been drawing a lot of attention to itself over privacy
issues, from a new privacy policy, to offering users the option to
essentially sell their privacy.  The new privacy policy goes live as of
March 1st, if everything goes as Google plans and although the reaction
to it is almost entirely negative, I don't find it particularly
surprising.  According to Google it is intended to unify all its
services more, rather than maintaining a privacy policy for each
individual service, which makes sense.

At about the same time, Google unleashed a much quieter offering that
essentially pays users to give up their privacy so that they can be
monitored and so Google can "learn more about its users to enhance its
services."  This offering gives users the option to be paid a total of
\$25 in instalments for running a browser extension to track them
online, or significantly more if they allow Google to install hardware
on their network that tracks *everything*.  Although this is voluntary,
it is a vast departure from Google's motto of "do no evil," and has
understandably been met with significant disapproval.  Google's goals
for this research may be to improve their services, but it is nothing
short of invasive and an extreme violation of privacy and it is
difficult to see why it is necessary given Google's huge ability to
track people online as it is.  As a Google user, I have a personal
problem with using their services if they intend to improve them by
removing the people's privacy entirely, no matter how voluntarily it may
have been given up.

Google has had a bad few months with privacy issues as it is, but its
week has taken another downward turn with regards to how it tracks
users.  Generally, companies that reach even half of Google's size make
headlines if they are penetrated by hackers. Even Google has had issues
in the past with cross-site scripting to steal Google Apps domains and
other information.  This time around, it appears to be Google doing the
hacking.  Earlier this week, Google and a few other advertising
companies were caught using workarounds to bypass the privacy controls
of Apple's Safari web browser in order to track users and serve ads. 
Not long after, Microsoft accused Google of doing the same with Internet
Explorer.  This is not only an unquestionable violation of privacy, but
a violation of Internet standards as well, which is unlike Google
considering their status as a web company.

Unfortunately, given how widely Google is used- they serve ads across
the Internet along with other advertisers, there is no good way to
escape any of this, other than turning off cookies, turning off
Javascript, and installing browser extensions such as Ghostery to block
tracking (even I use their tracking service to monitor my blog, a choice
I am reconsidering).  Given Google's control over the Internet, these
privacy and standard violations impact a much wider audience than just
Google users.  Officially, it seems that nothing can be kept secret from
Google anymore no matter who you are and what services you use.  It is
well known that the Internet provides very little, if any privacy at
all, and with a company as pervasive as Google working to bypass what
little privacy control web users have, the Internet becomes a very scary
place.
