--- 
layout: post
title: Historically Searching...
head-image: lego-technician.jpg
tags: [privacy, google, microsoft, security, personal, internet]
---

Digging through the data that the online services you use have stored
(and available to you) is always an interesting endeavour. At this
point, most people realize that no matter what websites you're signed up
for, most, if not all of them store some amount of information about
you. Some sites choose to tell you about the data they collect, and
others even give you a nice log of everything from where you've logged
in from to everything you've searched for. Generally, the reasoning
behind keeping this data is that it allows services to show you more
relevant ads and to customize your searches so that you'll only find the
things you want to see. It's actually a very interesting exercise to
make a new account on Google, for example, on a brand new browser and
start searching for things. After a surprisingly short amount of time,
Google stops showing you things that you disagree with.

Microsoft and Google, both running search engines and having a fair
amount of social network users at their disposal not to mention file
storage, hold a massive amount of information about users. That fact
isn't surprising, it comes with the territory of providing a large
number of services to users that to a degree evolve around each user.
Both companies customize search results and advertising around what
their users do. Microsoft is actually the lesser evil here, because they
don't index emails in order to provide the ads on their free email
service, but they do keep tabs on what gets stored on their services. As
we all know, if you upload data to any online storage, the company can
have their systems take a look and target ads. What else do these
services keep around? Not a lot of people consider that their searches
hang around.

It's an interesting exercise, particularly with Google, to go and take a
look at your search history. Google gives you a nice panel of statistics
about your searching as well as every search you've ever made while
logged in. Bing allows you to look through your history but doesn't give
you any statistics about it. My Google account has on record 19,031
searches since I created it in 2009. I can clearly pick out the blocks
of time where I was learning a new programming language as well as what
classes I was taking at the time, down to the time of day. The majority
of my searches happen 4-8pm. The takeaway from this is that Google has
on record 4 years worth of my online activity, and Bing has longer since
that account is much older. Both allow you to clear your history, which
they both recommend that you not do because it puts you back at square
one for ads and suggestions, although it doesn't take very long to end
up back in your search bubble. As someone who is security and privacy
conscious, I'm not particularly fond of having my searches logged. If
you agree, clear out your history regularly or use a search engine such
as duckduckgo.com which doesn't log searches. No matter what your
stance, it's important to keep in mind what and how much data gets
stored about you as you go about your online life. I respect the fact
that some people are conscious to the fact, which is why I offer the
option to opt-out of being tracked across my site (privacy page if
you're looking) to the degree that I have control over. Most sites just
log everything and everyone.

Useful Links:

Google Search history: https://history.google.com/history

Bing Search history: https://ssl.bing.com/profile/history
