---
layout: post
title: We're Moving!
head-image: /images/og-default.png
tags: [untagged]
---

There's been some big changes in the works for The Philosophy of Nate
for a few months now, and it's finally time to show them off. I've been
working on developing my own platform to host The Philosophy of Nate in
hopes of migrating the blog from Blogger to a new platform that's
faster, cleaner, and especially, focuses on improving how readers such
as yourselves interact with my blog. The new platform has substantially
better integration with the rest of my website which allows me to make
browsing more uniform and to expand options such as my website's "do not
track" feature.

I expect to make the switch sometime midweek. Everything is set up for
the migration to be clean and simple so on your end, the blog gets a new
look and some new options but otherwise should continue to work as it
always has since all the web addresses will redirect. However, those who
subscribe by any means may run into a few bumps with the feed switching
over depending how FeedBurner handles the change. I apologize in advance
for any extra feed notifications or emails (FeedBurner is configured to
only send one email per 24 hours, so those getting emails will get at
most 1 email). Comments and the commenting system will get pulled over a
few days after the switch is made.

If you're interested in taking a look at the new platform before the
blog officially gets moved over or you want more information, visit
<http://www.thenaterhood.com/scratchandsniff>. Feedback is always
welcome.

Meanwhile, if you're new to The Philosophy of Nate, welcome! If you like
what you see, consider subscribing to stay up to date.

**Update: The migration is complete and everything appears to be working
as it should.**
