---
title: Code as Creativity
author: Nate Levesque
layout: post
head-image: /images/posts/source-code.jpg
---

As a culture, we've manufactured a mindset where art is creative, but technical disciplines are not. Due in part to the fact that engineering usually comes in the form of exact results and is spoken of in terms that are sometimes difficult to understand, it often is assumed that there isn't room for creativity. This divide is imaginary because the technical and the creative are perfectly capable of coexisting. Working within the constraints of an engineering project does not restrict creativity, it tends to encourage more of it.

Examining the technical/creative mix from a software standpoint, there is a lot of room for and a lot of need for creativity. There is far from a single way to write a program. Source code can be written many ways to solve the same problem. Code is nothing mythical and does not constrain a developer to doing everything in a specific way, it's just another language for writing instructions in. In fact, a research project several years ago discovered that it was possible to identify who wrote a section of source code based on the style of the code. While experience will often change how a person designs and writes software, it isn't really any different from an author's style maturing over time. Developers have the ability, for example, to decide between using a 'while' or 'for' loop or recursion, all of which are usually interchangeable. There may also be constraints based on what the computer the code will run on is capable of doing. A great example of this is in the Quake III Arena source code, which needed to take the inverse square root of a number frequently and very quickly. This resulted in the creation of a novel method of doing it involving a constant (unchanging) number, documented in the code as "what the fuck?"

In addition to the source code itself, there is an amount of architectural design that goes into software. During the planning stages of a project, there are architectural drawings created and revised. There are accepted patterns to use to ensure that a design makes sense even after the original designer leaves the project but how they are used and combined is up to the discretion of the designer. There may also be constraints that the engineer needs to work within, which can involve designing workarounds or novel methods of doing things to make everything fit.

By limiting ourselves (and our idea of others) to the idea that technical disciplines lack creativity, we create a closed-minded view of the world. Sure, source code may not be an interesting read to the layperson, but seeing novel ways of doing things in it is just as interesting as reading a new spin on an old story. Technical people benefit from building their creative process as much as the sculptor across the street. We also alienate people who openly identify as being creative from taking part in more technical disciplines. Source code certainly doesn't look like a painting, but it is an art form in and of itself, slightly different depending who created it.

We all see the world in different ways. Whether we choose to express our views as code, schematics, paintings, writing, or anything else, we still stand to gain from nurturing our creativity. A technical discipline is no less creative than an artistic one, the work produced just takes a different form - and often, many forms - before it reaches the form people experience it as. However, just as there is bad art, there is bad code.
